This will be an interesting set of videos.
We're going to manipulate attention heads similar to the previous couple of videos, but now, instead
of just measuring the impact on the final output of the model, we are going to measure the impact on
the cosine similarity of embeddings vectors in the hidden states or the outputs of the transformer blocks.
That's an interesting way to assess whether the vector adjustments calculated by the attention heads
are impacting the way that the token representations are related to each other.
So the purpose of this video is for me to show you some code to set up and run a basic analysis, and
then in the next video, you will expand on this concept in several ways.
I will work with GPT two medium in this demo.
Here is what the hook function looks like.
Basically the same as what you've seen before.
I'm hooking into the input layer of C proj, picking out one head and setting it to zero.
Now in this video, I'm zeroing out all of the tokens in this head, and then in the next video you
are going to isolate just one specific head based on a particular meaning of one token in the text.
And what is that text that we will use here?
It's this peanut butter and pineapple taste great on pizza.
If you are Italian or an Italiano file then I promise this is just a joke.
I'm just being silly.
I'm not being serious at all, just trying to have some fun here.
And if you are not Italian, then this sentence is absolutely true and I stand by it.
And you should definitely try peanut butter and pineapple on your next pizza.
Anyway, so the idea here is that we will calculate cosine similarity across all the pairs of tokens
after zeroing out one of the heads in a layer.
And why do we do that?
Remember that the primary goal of the attention subblock is to integrate contextual information across
the different tokens in a text.
And so if that is the case, then silencing the attention heads should have some impact on the cosine
similarity between the representations of the different tokens.
So to measure that I'm going to run through a for loop that looks like this.
So here's a for loop over all of the layers.
Here I'm grabbing all of the data from one layer into a matrix that is tokens by embeddings.
And I'm skipping the first token here in the sequence for reasons, you know.
And here I'm also adding plus one to the layer index.
I would like you to think about why I'm doing that.
This is something that's come up several times in the course, but always good to have a reminder anyway.
Of course I will discuss the answer to why we want this plus one when I switch to code, but something
for you to think about before I get there.
Anyway, I hope the rest of this code looks familiar to you from earlier in the course.
So here in this line I normalize all of the embeddings vectors by their norm.
And then I multiply that matrix by its transpose which gives me a matrix of cosine similarities.
And then here I'm just grabbing the and storing all of the unique elements above the diagonal.
Now if this code looks a little confusing at first, then don't worry, I will go through it again in
the code demo to make sure you understand what's going on with all this indexing business.
Now this variable keys is tokens by tokens up here.
I create a variable called unique count, which I define as n by one times n by two divided by two.
What does this formula mean and what does it correspond to?
Again, I will discuss the answer to that question when I switch to code, but I want to give you an
opportunity to think about it first.
Okay.
Once I get all of the cosine similarities across all of the token pairs for each layer, I will then
repeat this code, but silencing one head from each layer.
I'm not going to loop through all of the attention heads.
That's something you will do in the code challenge in the next video.
So here I just fixed the head to silence at one.
So index one.
And here you see those results.
So let me first direct your attention to this plot.
On the left we have the transformer block on the x axis, cosine similarity strength on the y axis.
And each little square here corresponds to the cosine similarity between one of the token pairs.
So this is in the clean model.
So there's no manipulations in here.
There's no zeroing out.
We haven't done anything to the model at this plot over here.
So it's pretty neat to see that the cosine similarities generally decrease as we get deeper into the
model.
And then they suddenly start to increase, going up to a ceiling of one as we work our way towards the
end of the model.
So it looks like the model is kind of decoupling these representations of different tokens as it's trying
to load context and figure out what is the relationship between, for example, peanut butter and pineapple
and pizza.
And then towards the end of the model, it starts to converge onto a prediction.
So those embeddings vectors also start to converge.
Anyway, this middle panel shows the same analysis, but with silencing one of the attention heads.
Now at first pass visual inspection, it doesn't really seem like there are huge differences between
these two panels.
That's to be expected.
Zeroing out one attention head is not a gigantic manipulation.
And here in the third plot, you can see the differences between the clean and the silenced models for
cosine similarity.
I've ordered the subtraction here such that positive values in this difference score mean stronger cosine
similarity after silencing and negative values mean weaker cosine similarity after silencing one of
the attention heads.
I also ran a t test across these differences for all of the token pairs against zero.
That's the horizontal line here where the T test was non-significant.
There are red x's and where it was significant.
You see these triangle markers.
So the effect size is in general quite small around an order of magnitude smaller than the overall magnitude
of the cosine similarity.
In other words, the impact of ablating one head is generally quite small, but in many cases it is
consistent across the different token pairs.
Interestingly, it also seems like the direction of the effect changes over the different layers.
So sometimes silencing the head promotes coupling of the embeddings vectors, and for other layers it
promotes decoupling.
So in this figure here, I silenced one head in each layer and then measured cosine similarity of the
transformer outputs in that same letter.
The next analysis I did was only to silence exactly one head only in layer three, but then measure
the cosine similarities at all of the other transformer blocks.
In other words, only one head in the entire model was silenced and it was always one head in layer
three.
So no surprise, there is no difference between the silenced and the clean cosine similarities before
layer three, because that was before I manipulated the attention head.
And a lot of these layers are not statistically significantly different from zero in terms of their
change from silence versus clean.
But actually towards the end you do see some consistent impact of silencing that one head all the way
back in layer three on inter token cosine similarities going out towards the end of the model.
On the other hand, the effect size now is really tiny here, so it's now just two orders of magnitude
smaller than the overall cosine similarities.
And also this is just one example sentence.
So I certainly don't want to over interpret this result.
But it is pretty interesting that such a tiny manipulation so early on in the model has these ripple
effects throughout the rest of the transformer.
Anyway, let's now switch to code and walk through this demo in more detail.
Import some libraries, import GPT two medium.
And I'm actually just working on the CPU here because yeah, we're not doing a lot of forward passes,
so we don't really need the GPU here.
Just as a reminder, there are 24 transformer blocks in GPT two medium.
Here I'm defining some useful variables this you've seen before.
So just a way to have these shorter variables.
Instead of having to write out all of this business each time.
Okay, here is the hook that I am implanting.
So only for one layer.
Actually let me start down here.
So I'm implanting this hook into the C proj layer of attention.
So the projection component of the attention layer.
And this is a pre hook which means I'm getting all of the activations before the linear mixing matrix
which is the main purpose of C proj okay.
So now and then yeah this goes into all of the layers.
And then actually it turns out that in most of the layers this will do absolutely nothing except check
for this conditional which is going to be false for all but one of the transformer blocks.
But when this is true, this variable that I will create in the experiments later on, when this layer
number where this hook is implanted into equals that number, that variable that I specify, then I
grab the input into the model and reshape it so that I can easily index the attention heads.
And then here I'm ablating.
So I'm zeroing out the attention head just for this one head.
And yeah, all of the dimensions in this head, all of the tokens in the text and all of the sequences
in the batch.
Although here is just one sequence, so batch size of one here I reshape it back again and then output
the input so that this modified input is what continues to be processed and multiplied and linearly
mixed by the W0 matrix before being sent out of the attention subblock, and then provided as input
into the MLP Subblock.
Okay, so run that cell and uh.
Yeah, just a joke, guys.
I'm just having fun here.
Peanut butter and pineapple tastes great on pizza.
I have no strong opinion about pizza.
A pineapple on pizza that I'm willing to admit.
Uh, I have never in my entire life had peanut butter on pizza.
But, you know, I think it's good to be open minded.
Anyway, uh, okay.
So interesting to see that all of the words in this sentence are single token words, except for the
very first word, which is P, innit?
So, uh, that got split up and I think it just got split up because of the spacing.
Oh no, it's still actually even space peanut.
Maybe peanut with the lowercase.
Okay.
So space lowercase p that actually does go into a single, uh, token there.
But this is how I am going to continue processing this.
Okay.
So peanut butter and pineapple I'm not going to repeat that out loud too much okay.
Moving right along here I initialize this variable layer to silence to be 1000.
That means that that conditional in the beginning of the hook will never be true.
And that means that when I run this model, none of those hooking functions will ever activate, which
means nothing is going to be ablated.
This model is a clean version of the model and it's not going to do anything.
We're not manipulating anything here.
Okay.
And then I'm getting the hidden states here.
By the way, I forgot to mention this earlier, but just as also a reminder, notice that I'm not actually
We are exporting any data from this hook.
I'm not saving any of the data, because what I want to analyze in this code demo is not the inner workings
of attention.
I want to manipulate that, but what I want to analyze are the outputs of the entire transformer block,
which is the hidden states that we can get just by using this optional input here.
Okay.
So, uh, one sequence in the batch nine tokens and 1024 embeddings dimensions for GPT two medium.
And then here is this piece of code here where I am looping over all of the layers, uh, extracting
the data, excluding the first token, for reasons I've said a billion times earlier in this course.
Uh, yeah.
And then basically just calculating a cosine similarity matrix and then isolating it.
Okay.
So what is all of this code doing here?
So here I have actually let me I can show you this.
So I have CSS and sorry what I want to show is CSS mat.
Okay.
This is a symmetric matrix.
So all the elements below the diagonal equal all the elements above the diagonal.
And the diagonal elements themselves are all one because every vector is perfectly correlated or perfectly,
uh, cosine similar to itself as.
So it gets a value of one on the diagonal.
Now what we want is to extract all of the unique elements in this matrix, and that is all of the elements
above the diagonal.
And so to get that then I use this statement over here.
So I get the triangular upper.
And then I have the one here means exclude the diagonal.
So you can see here the diagonals are still included.
Uh and then here we get above the diagonal.
And now I'm just saying where these values are not equal to zero and then just converting them into
numpy.
Okay.
That is all a reminder of what you learned earlier in the course.
But I know it was a long time ago in the course, so I thought it would be nice to explain all this
again.
Now, what is the size of this matrix?
The size of this matrix is layers by something.
So we know the layers come from the number of layers in the model, the number of transformer blocks.
The question is how many unique elements are there in this matrix.
Well, there is a formula for the number of unique elements in a symmetric matrix.
And that formula is m times m minus one divided by two.
And where does this formula come from.
So m for a square symmetric matrix this would be the number of rows or the number of columns, and basically
the total number of elements in a matrix is m squared, so m times m.
But we want to exclude the diagonal because that is trivially equal to one.
We don't care about that.
And then we divide by two to get either the upper triangle or the lower triangle okay.
And that is the explanation of this formula over here.
Now why is it tokens minus one times tokens minus two.
If I just said that it was m times m minus one.
The reason for that is that I'm excluding the first token over here.
So the size of this matrix is actually tokens minus one by tokens minus one.
Because I'm skipping the very first token in this sequence.
Okay.
And then I had one more question about this plus one here and here.
The answer is that remember that the hidden states that get output from the model when we request output,
hidden states equals true.
That means all of the transformer blocks plus the embeddings layer.
But that is the first one.
So if we just want the transformer blocks then we always need to index these by plus one.
Okay.
So all of that was just a lot of review.
But I think it's a good to have that review.
Okay.
So now I am going to actually silence one of the heads.
So I choose layer five here as a demo.
So I'm going to zero out head index one.
So the second head in layer five run the model through again.
And now I give this output variable a different name out.
Silence.
And here I'm calculating the cosine similarities.
Again not much to see here.
This is just the actual numbers okay.
So this was just a code demo of how this works.
So now what I'm going to do is run the first of two experiments.
In this code demo, I am looping over all of the layers, all the transformer blocks in this model,
and notice that the looping index variable is layer to silence, which means that each iteration through
this for loop, we are going to be silencing head number one from each layer.
In turn, run through the model so forward pass cosine similarities and extract the unique elements
exactly as you have seen before.
And I just have that stored in this variable here.
Cosine similarity underscore manip for manipulation okay.
So this takes nine seconds.
I think if you put this model on the GPU it would probably take less than one second.
But I don't mind waiting eight seconds here okay.
And then here I'm doing some plotting.
So let me show you the plots first.
And then I will briefly walk through the code.
Okay.
So you've seen this before.
These are the cosine similarities from the clean model and from the layer specific silencing version
of the model.
And then here we have their differences.
So to generate this plot I'm looping again over layers.
And that's just because I want to have unique color values for each of the layers.
So these these are the x coordinates here.
These are the y axis values for clean and manipulated versions of the model.
And then I set the model face the marker face color to be a plasma and a scaled version of plasma.
And that's how I get the color to go from deep purple to this light yellow color over here as we go
through the transformer blocks.
And then to get these differences over here that you see here.
So I'm running a t test.
I'm calling this a one sample.
Technically this is a paired samples t test.
But it turns out that a paired samples t test is equivalent to a one sample t test on the difference.
So this.
I find this a little more intuitive.
It doesn't matter.
You could also use.
By the way you could also do this t test rel and then comma this.
So you're providing these two inputs and then you don't get a zero.
I think that's correct.
Yeah that's correct.
It's all the same mathematically it's fine.
Okay.
So manipulated versus the clean version.
And here I'm just saying that if the p value is less than 0.05, then show the colors with a triangle.
And if it's greater than 0.05, then you can show a red x for the non-significant layers here.
Now technically we probably should be controlling for multiple comparisons.
Maybe I'll even add that in here.
So if this is less than 0.05 divided by n layers, and let's see if that changes a little bit.
Yeah.
So I made the threshold a little bit more conservative to correct for the fact that I'm running 24 t
tests over 24 transformer blocks.
And yeah, overall the patterns are still pretty significant.
So it's interesting to note because the effect sizes are quite small.
So this is a subtle manipulation.
But it does have an impact.
Okay.
So now for the last demo that I want to run here.
Here I'm just picking one layer uh, kind of at random.
Although it's interesting that this turns out to be a layer that is not statistically significant here.
And still I'm going to manipulate one head in just that layer.
Okay.
So now we only need one forward pass because we're only, uh, silencing one head in one layer.
And then I am getting all of the hidden states from all of the layers in total, even the ones that
I did not manipulate.
And then.
Yeah, otherwise the rest of this code is the same.
The rest of this plotting code is also the same.
And yeah, it's pretty remarkable that even though this manipulation was pretty subtle, it happened
early in the model.
It seems like it has a ripple effect that continues all the way later into the model.
Complex systems are remarkable in that small and seemingly inconsequential manipulations can be rippled
throughout the rest of the system.
I think that a better characterization of these kinds of deep learning models will come from thinking
about how very small things in the model relate to very big things in the model.
Anyway, I hope you found this code demo to be thought provoking.
In the next code challenge, you are going to continue working with this concept and with these methods.